CAP 62 (#1576)
stellar/stellar-protocol: core/cap-0062.md

Currently both live and archived Soroban state are maintained in a single BucketList DB. This makes data prioritization difficult
since all state exists in a singular data structure. This proposal separates archived state and live state into two separate DBs.
While these DBs are still both persisted on disk by validators, optimizing live state access is significantly easier. In particular,
live state can be entirely cached in memory, removing disk reads from the Soroban transaction execution path, greatly increasing
read limits and throughput.

Each validator will maintain two BucketLists, the Live BucketList and the Hot Archive BucketList. `PERSISTENT` Soroban
data entries and code entries that have expired will be "evicted" from the Live BucketList and moved to the Hot Archive
BucketList. Both the Live BucketList and Hot Archive BucketList are persisted on disk and written to History Archives.

Note that this proposal is a subset of [CAP-0057](cap-0057.md). The Hot Archive here is the same as CAP-0057, and this CAP
is a strict subset of CAP-0057. The purpose is not to replace CAP-0057, but to offer a smaller first step implementation wise.

## Specification

### XDR changes

> ```

Reviewer: This is usually rendered as a `diff` to make it easier to read :thinking:

Author: Yeah, I just have it in this format for now since I haven't actually made the XDR changes yet (since we're still finalizing them). Once we have consensus I'll update the actual XDR and provide a nice diff.

    // but have just been renamed

    // The following parameters determine the write fee per 1KB.
    // Write fee grows linearly until bucket list reaches this size
    int64 sorobanLiveStateTargetSizeBytes;
    // Fee per 1KB write when the bucket list is empty
    int64 writeFee1KBSorobanStateLow;
    // Fee per 1KB write when the bucket list has reached `sorobanLiveStateTargetSizeBytes`
    int64 writeFee1KBSorobanStateHigh;
    // Write fee multiplier for any additional data past the first `sorobanLiveStateSizeBytes`
    uint32 sorobanStateWriteFeeGrowthFactor;
};
```

### Semantics

With this change, the current BucketList is divided into two separate BucketLists as follows.

#### Live State BucketList

The Live State BucketList most closely resembles the current BucketList. It will contain all “live” state of the ledger, including
Stellar classic entries, live Soroban entries, network config settings, etc.
The Live State BucketList is published to the History Archive on every checkpoint ledger via the "history" category. The Live BucketList
functions identically to the current BucketList.

#### Hot Archive BucketList

> The Hot Archive is a BucketList that stores evicted `PERSISTENT` entries

Reviewer: nit: missing period 
```suggestion
The Hot Archive is a BucketList that stores evicted `PERSISTENT` entries.
```

#### Changes to History Archives

The `HistoryArchiveState` will be extended as follows:

```
version: number identifying the file format version
server: an optional debugging string identifying the software that wrote the file
networkPassphrase: an optional string identifying the networkPassphrase
currentLedger: a number denoting the ledger this file describes the state of
currentBuckets: an array containing an encoding of the live state bucket list for this ledger
hotArchiveBuckets: an array containing an encoding of the hot archive bucket list for this ledger
```

Bucket files for the `hotArchiveBuckets` will be stored just as Bucket files are currently stored.

#### Changes to LedgerHeader

While the XDR structure of `LedgerHeader` remains unchanged, `bucketListHash` will be changed to the following:

```
header.bucketListHash = SHA256(liveStateBucketListHash, hotArchiveHash)
```

#### Meta

Whenever a `PERSISTENT` entry is evicted (i.e. removed from the Live State BucketList and added to the Hot Archive),
the entry key and its associated TTL key will be emitted via `evictedLedgerKeys`
(this field has been renamed and was previously named `evictedTemporaryLedgerKeys`).

> Whenever an entry is restored via `RestoreFootprintOp`, the `LedgerEntry` being restored and its
> associated TTL will be emitted as a `LedgerEntryChange` of type `LEDGER_ENTRY_RESTORE`. Note that
> entries being restored may not have been evicted such that entries currently in the Live State BucketList
> can see `LEDGER_ENTRY_RESTORE` events.

Reviewer: For this

> Note that entries being restored may not have been evicted such that entries currently in the Live State BucketList can see `LEDGER_ENTRY_RESTORE` events.

I'd like to make sure I understand it correctly: Are you saying that `LEDGER_ENTRY_RESTORE` does not necessarily mean restoration from eviction because live state may have an expired-yet-not-evicted entry that can be restored before it pops off the end of the BL?

If yes, I'd like to suggest a rewording:

```suggestion
Whenever an entry is restored via `RestoreFootprintOp`, the `LedgerEntry` being restored and its
associated TTL will be emitted as a `LedgerEntryChange` of type `LEDGER_ENTRY_RESTORE`. Note that
entries can be restored from both the Live State and Hot Archive BucketList, because archived entries 
continue to exist in Live State until they are evicted as part of natural BucketList growth. The emitted
meta does not distinguish between these.
```

Author: Your understanding is correct, I'll reword it.

now that classic state growth no longer affects Soroban fees.

## Design Rationale

### CAP-0062 vs. CAP-0057

This CAP is a strict subset of [CAP-0057](cap-0057.md). The intention is not to replace CAP-0057, but to implement this CAP
first as a step towards CAP-0057. At current usage levels, "full state archival" as specified by CAP-0057 (i.e. evicted entries are deleted
from validators) is not a necessary or useful optimization. The space savings of validators and the History Archive would be
minimal, and the additional complexity, both from a computational and UX standpoint, do not justify the minimal storage savings.
Long term, should usage increase, the tradeoffs introduced by CAP-0057 will make more sense, but that is not the case currently
or in the near term future.

The reasoning behind introducing CAP-0057 before it was strictly necessary was to prevent breakage of applications. If applications
and users were not prepared for State Archival, it would be very difficult to enable CAP-0057. However, because
[CAP-0046-12](./cap-0046-12.md) is implemented and State Archival semantics are already required, upgrading to CAP-0057 should not

> be breaking, especially since much of the complexity, like proof generation, is handled automatically by RPC endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be breaking, especially since much of the complexity, like proof generation, will be handled automatically by new Stellar Core HTTP endpoints.
```

Is that correct? While RPC will be the facilitator via `simulateTransaction`, the proofs are actually generated by `/getrestorationproof` per https://github.com/stellar/go/issues/5426, right?

Author: Yeah, I meant from a contract invoker's perspective it's handled by RPC. I'll clarify.

Hot Archive will be dropped from validators. Thus long term, from a network health standpoint, the size of
the Hot Archive does not have a significant impact on network sustainability.

Prior to CAP-0057, large Hot Archives do impact network sustainability, specifically with respect to History
Archive size, catchup time, and node disk requirements. However, a fee based on Hot Archive size does not
seem to address this issue. First, there is currently no way to remove state from the Hot Archive. Only
restore operations remove Hot Archive state, but this state is just added back to the Live BucketList. Thus
fees would continually increase without any benefit to network sustainability, as no action or system is
currently in place to reduce Hot Archive size.

While not improving network sustainability, Hot Archive fees could prevent state based DOS attacks, where
state is rapidly added to the network. However, unlike the live BucketList, operations cannot directly
write state to the Hot Archive (with the exception of restores, which always decrease Hot Archive size).
The rate of eviction (i.e. the rate at which state is added to the Hot Archive) can already be controlled

> via network config settings. The rate at which state is added to the Live BucketList is also already

Reviewer: Can you elaborate on this? I was under the impression that eviction is controlled by state TTL rather than network configurations. Or is this referencing the eviction of already-archived entries in the live BL?

Author: Ya this is the eviction of already archived entries. The Live BucketList at any given time may hold an arbitrary number of archived entries (since the TTL alone dictates this). However the rate at which we evict these archived entries (remove them from the Live BucketList and add them to the Hot Archive BucketList) is restricted via network config settings (specifically there are settings for both max entries to evict and max bytes to evict).

Author: Note that this is an implementation detail, the restore Op looks the same to the invoker whether or not the archived entry has been evicted or not.

Reviewer: Right yep, understood that and hence wanted to clarify that that's exactly what was being discussed here
